Aim: Use the inbuilt dataset “titanic” the dataset contains 891 rows and contains
informationabout the passengers who boarded the unfortunate titanic ship use
the seaborn liabrary to see if we can find any patterns in the data.

Code:

import seaborn as sns
df= sns.load_dataset('titanic')

df

df=df[['survived','class','sex','age','fare']]

 df

sns.jointplot(x='age',y='fare',data=df)

sns.jointplot(x='age',y='fare',data=df,hue='survived')

sns.jointplot(x='age',y='fare',data=df,hue='class')

sns.pairplot(df,hue='sex')

sns.countplot(x=df['sex'])

sns.countplot(x=df['class'])

sns.barplot(x='sex',y='survived',data=df)

sns.barplot(x='sex',y='survived',hue='class',data=df)

sns.histplot(df['fare'])

sns.kdeplot(df['fare'])


Description:

Objective:
To explore the inbuilt Titanic dataset using the Seaborn library in Python, analyzing various features to identify patterns and insights related to passenger survival rates, demographics, and travel characteristics.

Theory:
The Titanic dataset is a classic machine learning dataset that contains information about the passengers who were on board the RMS Titanic, which sank in 1912. It includes 891 rows and 12 columns, capturing details like Passenger Class (Pclass), Name, Sex, Age, SibSp (siblings/spouses aboard), Parch (parents/children aboard), Ticket, Fare, Cabin, and Embarked (port of embarkation).

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is a crucial first step in data science, helping to uncover hidden patterns, detect anomalies, test hypotheses, and check assumptions using statistical graphics. Seaborn is a powerful Python library built on top of matplotlib that provides a high-level interface for drawing informative and attractive statistical graphics. Key Seaborn functions often used in Titanic analysis include:
    sns.countplot() - To visualize the count distribution of a categorical variable.
    sns.barplot() - For showing the relationship between a categorical and a continuous variable.
    sns.heatmap() - For visualizing correlation matrices.
    sns.boxplot() - To identify outliers and understand data distribution.
    sns.pairplot() - To visualize pairwise relationships in a dataset.
 Common EDA steps for the Titanic dataset include:
    Checking the distribution of survivors vs. non-survivors.
    Analyzing survival rates by gender, class, age, and port of embarkation.
    Identifying correlations between features like Pclass, Sex, and Fare with survival rates.

Conclusion:
This practical exercise provided a comprehensive understanding of how to use Seaborn for visual data exploration. It highlighted the critical role of data visualization in uncovering hidden patterns, such as the significant impact of gender, passenger class, and family connections on survival rates. This approach is essential for generating insights before building predictive models, ultimately improving the accuracy and interpretability of machine learning algorithms.



Explaination:

import seaborn as sns
---mports the Seaborn library

df = sns.load_dataset('titanic')
df
---Loads the built-in Titanic dataset from Seaborn, which contains 891 rows and 15 columns, including details like survival status, class, gender, age, fare, and port of embarkation.
   Displays the complete dataset as a pandas DataFrame.

df = df[['survived', 'class', 'sex', 'age', 'fare']]
df
---Filters the DataFrame to include only the columns 'survived', 'class', 'sex', 'age', and 'fare' for simpler analysis.
   Displays the updated DataFrame.

sns.jointplot(x='age', y='fare', data=df)
----Creates a jointplot showing the relationship between age and fare with marginal histograms on the sides.
    Useful for understanding the joint distribution and correlation between two continuous variables.

sns.jointplot(x='age', y='fare', data=df, hue='survived')
---Adds color encoding (hue) for the 'survived' column, distinguishing survivors from non-survivors.
Helps visualize how survival status relates to age and fare.

sns.jointplot(x='age', y='fare', data=df, hue='class')
---Similar to the previous jointplot, but the data points are colored by passenger class (First, Second, Third).
   Reveals how class and fare are closely related, with higher fares generally associated with higher classes.

sns.pairplot(df, hue='sex')
----Creates a grid of scatter plots for each possible pair of variables in the DataFrame, with histograms along the diagonal.
    Colors the plots by sex, making it easy to identify gender-based patterns.

sns.countplot(x=df['sex'])
---Generates a countplot to show the frequency distribution of the 'sex' column.
Quickly reveals the male-to-female ratio in the dataset.

sns.countplot(x=df['class'])
---Similar to the previous plot, but for 'class', showing the distribution of passengers across different ticket classes.

sns.barplot(x='sex', y='survived', data=df)
---Creates a barplot to visualize the average survival rate for each gender.
Clearly shows that females had a significantly higher survival rate than males.

sns.barplot(x='sex', y='survived', hue='class', data=df)
----Adds an additional layer of grouping by 'class', revealing how survival rates vary across both sex and class.
Typically shows that First Class passengers had better survival rates overall.

sns.histplot(df['fare'])
---Plots the distribution of the 'fare' column, showing how fares were mostly concentrated in the lower range.
Useful for detecting skewness in the data.

sns.kdeplot(df['fare'])---Creates a Kernel Density Estimate (KDE) plot to visualize the distribution of fares as a smooth curve.
Offers a more refined view compared to the histogram, highlighting the underlying distribution shape.


Questions :

Basic Seaborn and Dataset Questions:
What is Seaborn and why do we use it in data analysis?
Seaborn is a statistical data visualization library built on Matplotlib, used for making complex plots easier and more informative.

Why did you choose the Titanic dataset for this practical?
It’s a classic dataset for learning EDA, with diverse features and a clear binary classification problem (survival).

How is Seaborn different from Matplotlib?
Seaborn is built on Matplotlib but adds powerful statistical graphing tools and attractive default styles.

What is the significance of data visualization in data science?
It helps uncover patterns, detect outliers, and present findings clearly.

What type of data is typically stored in the Titanic dataset?
Passenger demographics, travel class, fare, survival status, and family connections.

Why did you filter the Titanic dataset to include only 'survived', 'class', 'sex', 'age', and 'fare'?
To focus on key features relevant for survival analysis.

How would you handle missing values in this dataset if they existed?
By dropping rows, filling with mean/median, or using predictive imputation.

Why is it important to understand the data before training a machine learning model?
To identify relevant features, detect errors, and avoid overfitting.

Specific Plot Questions:
What is a jointplot and when should you use it?
It shows the relationship between two variables with marginal distributions, useful for finding correlations.

What is the difference between a jointplot and a pairplot?
jointplot is for two variables, while pairplot is for all possible pairs of multiple variables.

Why did you use 'hue' in some of the jointplots?
To differentiate data points based on a categorical variable like 'survived' or 'class'.

What insights can you gain from a jointplot with 'hue' for 'survived'?
It shows survival patterns based on age and fare, revealing who had a better chance of survival.

What does the pairplot tell you about the relationship between multiple variables?
It shows pairwise relationships, distributions, and potential correlations.

How does the countplot differ from the barplot in Seaborn?
Countplot shows the frequency of each category, while barplot shows average values for a numerical variable.

What information can you extract from the countplot of 'sex' and 'class'?
The distribution of passengers by gender and travel class.

Why is it useful to visualize survival rates using barplots?
It clearly shows the impact of factors like gender and class on survival.

What is a KDE plot and when would you use it over a histogram?
It’s a smoothed version of a histogram, better for visualizing continuous distributions.

Why do we often see skewed distributions in fare data?
Because a few high fares significantly impact the overall distribution.

What does the height of the bars in a barplot represent?
The average value of the y-axis variable for each x-axis category.

Why did you choose to visualize 'fare' with both histplot and kdeplot?
To compare the raw distribution (histogram) with a smoother estimate (KDE).

Data Insights and Analysis Questions:
What can you infer about the survival rates based on 'sex' and 'class'?
Females and higher-class passengers had better survival rates.

Why do you think women had a higher survival rate in this dataset?
Likely due to the "women and children first" evacuation policy.

How does passenger class impact survival chances?
Higher classes had more access to lifeboats and safer locations on the ship.

What do you expect to see if you included 'age' in the survival analysis?
Likely lower survival rates for older passengers and infants.

How would you visualize the correlation between all numerical variables in this dataset?
Using a heatmap or pairplot.

What could cause outliers in the 'fare' distribution?
Wealthier passengers or group ticket purchases.

What would you do if you wanted to visualize survival rates across different age groups?
Use a barplot or violin plot with age bins.

How would you customize the color palette in these plots?
Use the palette parameter in Seaborn or set a custom color map.

What is the impact of adding 'hue' to your plots?
It adds a third dimension, revealing subgroup patterns.

How would you interpret a jointplot with tightly clustered points versus widely scattered points?
Clusters indicate strong relationships, while scattered points suggest weak or no correlation.

Practical and Follow-up Questions:
Can you add titles and labels to make these plots more meaningful?
Yes, using plt.title(), plt.xlabel(), and plt.ylabel().

How would you save these plots as images for a report?
Using plt.savefig('filename.png').

What are the limitations of visual analysis?
It can be subjective and might miss deeper statistical insights.

How would you handle a situation where the plots are too crowded or hard to read?
Use filtering, sampling, or split the data into smaller groups.

What would you do if your dataset had more than 20 features?
Use dimensionality reduction techniques like PCA or feature selection.

Can you explain the purpose of exploratory data analysis (EDA) in machine learning?
To understand data structure, detect anomalies, and guide feature engineering.

How would you use this visual analysis to guide your feature selection for a machine learning model?
By identifying the most impactful features on the target variable.

What other features in the Titanic dataset might be interesting to explore?
Family size, cabin location, and ticket type.

How would you add annotations to these plots to make them more informative?
Use plt.text() or sns.barplot() with annot=True.

What is the next step after visualizing the data in a real-world data science project?
Data cleaning, feature engineering, and model building.

